No. 41 
 
 
 
A strong economic recovery that improves prospects for equitable growth after the COVID-19 pandemic 
will need to address persistent inequity in school systems. About two-thirds of OECD governments have 
increased education budgets in response to the pandemic. While the overall level of available resources 
matters, their allocation is at least as important. At the same time, governments will also need to make 
difficult budgetary choices to support the recovery , and balance short -term and long- term economic 
and social goal. The pursuit of equity in school systems can go hand in hand with efficiency goals when 
it comes to the allocation of available resources. Funding approaches play an important role in achieving 
equity objectives . Ensuring that students with different needs and from different backgrounds have 
access to high quality education from an early age, for example, can be an effective mean s to reduce 
systemic inefficiencies (Johnson and Jackson, 2019 [1]). Drawing on evidence from the OECD School 
Resources Review and beyond , this policy brief explores how school funding policies can promote 
equitable learning opportunities for all students. In particular, this brief explores the following questions: 
• How can school systems ensure adequate levels of resources across sub-central 
authorities? 
• How can school funding approaches provide additional resources to schools most in need? 
• What is the role of transparency and evaluation for equity in school funding?  
 
About two-thirds of OECD governments raised their budget for education in response to the COVID -19 
pandemic, with the remainder maintaining a constant budget (OECD, 2021[2]). In addition, budgets devoted 
to education continued to increase in 2021. The economic recovery is, however, uneven and sizeable 
uncertainty remains. As governments across the OECD face different policy challenges in terms of 
employment and output (OECD, 2021[3]), they will need to make difficult budgetary choices to support the 
recovery, and balance short-term and long-term economic and social goals. 
A strong economic recovery  that improves prospects for equitable growth (OECD, 2021 [3]) will need to 
address persistent inequity in school systems . Students from socio -economically disadvantaged 
backgrounds or from rural areas have, for instance, experienced substantial challenges during the 
pandemic. Evidence from the OECD Programme for International Student Assessment ( PISA) 2018 
showed that students from socio-economically disadvantaged schools were less likely to have access to 
a computer for schoolwork and, in some countries, to benefit from an Internet connection at home.  In 
addition, perceptions of greater  shortages or inadequate digital technologies were also more recurrent 
among principals from disadvantaged schools.  At the system level, education systems where material 
resources are allocated inequitably among socio- economically advantaged and disadvantaged schools, 
tend to display lower student performance (Figure 1). 
Towards equity in school funding policies 2 | No. 41 – Towards equity in school funding policies   
 OECD EDUCATION POLICY PERSPECTIVES © OECD 2021 
  
Figure 1. Allocation of material resources related to schools’ socio-economic profile and reading 
performance 
Results based on principals' reports 
Montenegro
K azakh stan
Serbia
Macao (China)
Jorda n
Arge nti na
M alay si a
Le ba nonMorocco
Ukr ain e
Brunei Darussalam
Q atarPeru
C r oatia
P anam a
M alta
Domi nican Republic
Russia
Alban ia
Bulgaria
Si ngapore
Moldova
Hong Kong (China)
Georgia
B-S-J-Z (China)
Bos nia a nd He rzegovi na
Thailand Baku (Azerbaijan)
Roma nia
Kosovo
Br azil
Cos ta  Rica
Uni te d Ara b Emirates
Uruguay
Indonesia
North Macedonia
Chinese Taipei
Saudi Arabia
Phi l ippines
Be l arus
C hile
Japan
Me xi co
Hungary
Fra nce
C anad a
United States
Denmark
Ire l and
Sl ove nia
Is ra el
Italy
Norwa y
Au s tra lia
Ge rma ny
Aus tri a
Cze ch Re public
Ice l and
Es tonia
Sweden
Latv ia
Swi tze rlan d
Korea
New Zealand
Be l gium
Colombia
Turkey
Netherlands
Lithuania
Finland
P olan d
Portuga l
Sl ova k Republic
Greece
Luxembourg
Uni te d Ki ngdom
OECD average
R² = 0.24
300
350
400
450
500
550
600
-35 -30 -25 -20 -15 -10 -5 0 5
Average readi ng score
Strength of the relationship between the index of shortage of educational material and schools’ socio -economic profile.
More 
shortages of 
educational 
m ate rials in
advantaged 
schools
More shortages of educational materials in disadvantaged 
schools 
All countries 
and economies
 
Note: This is the strength of the association between the school's socio-economic profile and the principal's concern about the educational 
material at the school. Positive values indicate that principals of socio-economically advantaged schools are more concerned than principals of 
disadvantaged schools. Negative values indicate that principals of disadvantaged schools are more concerned than principals of advantaged 
schools. A value of 0 means there is no difference between advantaged and disadvantaged schools. 
Source: (OECD, 2020[4]), PISA 2018 Results (Volume V): Effective Policies, Successful Schools, Table I.B1.4 and Table V.B1.5.5, 
https://doi.org/10.1787/ca768d40-en. 
The overall level of investment in education is an important precondition for a quality provision for all 
students (Jackson, 2018[5]). Schools that lack quality teachers and leaders, adequate infrastructure and 
educational materials will have more difficulties to provide a high quality learning experience. Even school 
systems with comparatively high levels of funding may face resource challenges, which often affect 
disadvantaged areas or schools, thus raising serious equity concerns.  In the United States , for example, 
finance reforms directed to guarantee an adequate provision of resources in low income schools were 
crucial to reduce overall  achievement gaps between high and low income school dis tricts (Lafortune, 
Rothstein and Schanzenbach, 2018[6]; Jackson, Johnson and Persico, 2016[7]). 
While overall levels of investment matter, beyond a certain level of investment what matters most is how 
funding is allocated to schools that are most in need of additional resources. In response to the pandemic, 
OECD countries used a range of criteria to allocate additional expenditure in education. While 50% of them 
relied on the number of students/classes, aro und 40% used the proportion of students with special 
socio-economic characteristics and 30% the proportion of those with special needs  (OECD, 2021
[8]). No. 41 – Towards equity in school funding policies  | 3 
OECD EDUCATION POLICY PERSPECTIVES © OECD 2021 
      
Ensuring an equitable distribution of resources across schools requires attention to both horizontal equity 
(i.e. allocating similar levels of resources to similar types of provision) and vertical equity ( i.e. allocating 
different levels of resources to student groups with different needs).  While both concepts of equity seem 
to imply a trade- off, it is possible to allocate additional funding for schools with a higher proportion of 
students from disadvantaged backgrounds (vertical equity), while guaranteeing that such additional 
funding is identical for those groups of students or schools with similar characteristics (horizontal equity).  
Ensuring that all sub-central authorities have resources to meet the needs 
of their students 
Sub-central1 authorities are increasingly involved in raising resources for schoo l education and making 
decisions on the allocation and management of funds. Reliance on o wn tax revenues may support 
sub-central authorities in determining public service levels in line with local preferences and help mobilise 
additional resources for school education. At the same time, it entails risks to create inequities in funding 
available for schools across different regions/states/ localities. Typically, wealthier jurisdictions will be in a 
better position to raise their own revenues and to provide adequate funding per student than less wealthy 
ones. 
In such contexts, fiscal transfer systems have an important role to play in equalising revenue levels and 
ensuring that all jurisdictions have the necessary resources to provide opportunities for their students. The 
extent of transfers of public funds from central to sub- central levels of government varies widely between 
countries (Figure 2). While fiscal transfers and grants go beyond the school sector, getting the system right 
is particularly important for school education,  which often accounts for the largest share of the local 
budgets. The OECD School Resources Review provides examples from  different countries that have 
introduced fiscal transfer and equalisation mechanisms alongside reforms that shifted responsibilities for 
school funding to the local level: 
• When Brazil devolved authority from a highly centralised system to states and municipalities 
in the mid- 1990s, it created a Fund for the Maintenance and Development of Basic Schools 
and the Valorisation of the Teaching Profession (Fundo para Manutenção e Desenvolvimento 
do Ensino Fundamental e Valorização do Magistério, FUNDEF) to reduce the large national 
inequalities in per -student spending. State and municipal governments were required to 
transfer a proportion of their tax revenue to FUNDEF, which redistributed it to state and 
municipal governments that could not meet specified minimum levels of per -student 
expenditure. FUNDEF (which was subsequently revised in 2007 in the form of the Maintenance 
and Development Fund for Basic Education-  Fundo de Manutenção e Desenvolvimento da 
Educação Básica,  FUNDEB) did not prevent  wealthier regions from increasing their overall 
spending more rapidly than poorer regions, but played a highly redistributive role and increased 
both the absolute level of spending and the predictability of transfers.  There is evidence that 
FUNDEF and then FUNDEB have been instrumental in reducing disparities in educational 
funding across municipalities  (OECD, 2021
[9]). FUNDEB is being relaunched with a new 
mandate and as a permanent feature of the school funding system in Brazil (OECD, 2021[9]). 
 
                                                
1 The central level specifies authorities that make decisions or participate in different aspects of decision making on a 
national scale. This includes, among others, the central government, central education, financial and legislative 
authorities and central auditing services. All authorities below the central level in administrative terms  are referred to 
as sub-central level. 4 | No. 41 – Towards equity in school funding policies   
 OECD EDUCATION POLICY PERSPECTIVES © OECD 2021 
  
Figure 2. Distribution of initial sources of public funds for education and change in government 
levels' share of funds after intergovernmental transfers (2018) 
Primary, secondary and post-secondary non-tertiary education, in per cent 
 
Note: 1. Year of reference 2019. 2. Primary, secondary and post-secondary non-tertiary education includes pre-primary programmes. 
Countries are ranked in descending order of the share of initial sources of funds from the central level of government. 
Source: (OECD, 2021[10]), Education at a Glance 2021: OECD Indicators, Table C4.2 (accessed on 14 October 2021), http://stats.oecd.org, 
Education at a Glance Database. 
• By Constitution, Colombia’s education system is decentralised. However, the financing of the 
public school system comes mainly from the national level. Regional and local authorities that 
have been certified to provide education ( Entidades Territoriales Certificadas, ETC) receive a 
large share of their resources from the central government through the General Sys tem of 
Transfers (Sistema General de Participaciones , SGP) to provide the service of pre- primary, 
primary and secondary education. These transfers are complemented by the territorial entities’ 
own resources, according to their responsibilities within the decentrali sation model. The 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Initial funds from the central level of government Initial funds from the regional level of government Initial funds from the local level of government
Distribution of initial sources of public funds for education by level of government
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
Change in local government's share of funds after inter-governmental transfers
Change in regional government's share of funds after inter-governmental transfers
Change in central government's share of funds after inter-governmental transfers
Change in government levels' share of funds after intergovernmental transfers No. 41 – Towards equity in school funding policies  | 5 
OECD EDUCATION POLICY PERSPECTIVES © OECD 2021 
      
revenue sharing system, which pursues multiple public finance objectives, including education, 
also represents a tool for territorial and social compensation. Education resources are 
distributed among departments, districts and c ertified municipalities. A specific share per 
student is assigned annually based on conditions of equity and efficiency for every education 
level, differentiating geographic zone (urban- rural) and taking into account the number of 
students enrolled the previous year. These transfers do not take into account the fiscal capacity 
of the sub- national governments. In addition to the transfers from the SGP to the ETC for 
service provision, there are some additional resources that are transferred. An additional share 
of the resources distributed by student is allocated differentially with regard to the number of 
students with special needs (disabilities and special abilities), boarding schools where these 
are needed and for student connectivity. An additional fund is also distributed among schools 
and all districts and municipalities, both certified and not certified, specifically for quality 
improvement. 
• In Denmark, municipalities are the main providers of public services, including primary and 
lower secondary education. Municipal spending is primarily financed through central 
government grants and local taxes. The total level of the grants is decided through annual 
negotiations between the central and local governments. The grant -level for a given 
municipality is based on the population size in the given municipality.  In addition, there is a 
fiscal equalisation scheme, which on one hand takes into account tax revenue and on the other 
hand, expenditure needs depending on age composition and socio- economic structure in the 
municipalities. The fiscal equali sation scheme seeks to give municipalities a fairly similar 
financial basis depending on their population, so that all municipalities are able to provide a 
fairly similar service level across remits. 
• In Poland, education decentralisation was part of the overall decentralisation process of the 
country initiated in 1990. The main transfer from the central to local budgets is called “general 
subvention” and is composed of a few separately calculated components. Two main ones are 
the education component and the equalisation component. The education component is 
calculated on the basis of student numbers (with numerous coeff icients reflecting different 
costs of providing education to different groups of students), and thus reflects different costs 
of service provision. The equalisation component is based on a formula and equalises poorer 
jurisdictions up to 90% of average per capita revenues of similar local governments. 
Sub-central authorities need to have adequate 
revenues to meet the needs of all their 
students and relevant capacity to fulfil their 
responsibilities 
While funding availability  for and resource allocation across sub-central authorities matter, building their 
resource management capacity should be a further priority to ensure all sub-central authorities can support 
the provision of high quality education. Competency frameworks for local leaders and administrator s 
should reflect the related skills and be used to guide recruitment processes as well as training and 
professional development. In addition, professional development could be made available to staff and 
focus on, for instance, managing local school networks, financial planning, human resources management, 
quality assurance in education, etc. Networks of advisors could equally be established to support the 
education work of responsible authorities, and authorities could collaborate and share administrative and 
managerial resources and expertise. 6 | No. 41 – Towards equity in school funding policies   
 OECD EDUCATION POLICY PERSPECTIVES © OECD 2021 
  
Providing additional resources for disadvantaged schools  
Main funding allocation vs. targeted funds 
A key concern in designing funding allocation mechanisms is to ensure that resources are allocated 
equitably to schools that are most in need. There are two broad approaches t o recognise different needs 
across schools when allocating resources: i) including additional resources in the regular allocation (e.g. a 
weighted allocation to particular student groups within schools using a funding formula) ; or ii) through 
targeted programmes or grants for specific students, schools or areas (e.g. extra funding to compensate 
for socio-economic disadvantage).  
Often a mix of both approaches is found in school systems, and many countries provide targeted additional 
resources “in-kind”, typically in the form of teaching hours or positions.  For instance, on average across 
OECD countries  and economies , smaller classes are more commonly found in socio- economically 
disadvantaged or rural schools rather than in advantaged or urban ones. Disadvantaged and rural schools 
also have, on average, more teachers per students (OECD, 2020
[4]).    
The OECD School Resources  Review provides some examples for school systems that combine both 
approaches - including additional resources in the regular allocation and targeted programmes or grants – 
to compensate schools for additional needs:  
• In Austria, federal and provincial ed ucation authorities (organised jointly within Boards of 
Education) allocate staff resources to schools according to basic allocation principles, such as 
the number of pupils and pupils with special education needs. Supplementary staff resources 
are allocated for the purpose of supporting additional needs related to language tuition needs, 
socio-economic background, and all-day schooling.  
• In Chile, the Preferential School Subsidy (Subvención Escolar Preferencial, SEP) is the main 
funding allocation ( Subvención de Escolaridad) from the central government to school 
providers for the improvement of schools’ quality education. This subsidy is a resource that is 
granted to the school provider based on the number of priority and preferred students (Alumnos 
Prioritarios y Preferentes) of the school, their educational level and their attendance at classes. 
The priority and preferred students are determined based on their socio-economic background 
or other complementary criteria (e.g. health- related, parental education level , geographic 
location). The grant represents an  acknowledgment that providing quality education in 
disadvantaged contexts and according to the needs of students and schools has a higher cost, 
and therefore requires additional resources. The school  provider must sign an agreement, 
knowns as the Equality of Opportunities and Educational Excellence Agreement (Convenio de 
Igualdad de Oportunidades y Excelencia Educativa) , with the education ministry for the 
corresponding school and commit the use of the resources of this grant to actions, plans or 
strategies defined in an Educational Improvement Plan ( Plan de Mejoramiento Educativo, 
PME) with special emphasis on priority and preferred students. 
• In England (United Kingdom), the central government funds public (local authority 
maintained schools) and government -dependent private schools (academies) through its 
Education and Skills Funding Agency (ESFA). While maintained schools receive their funding 
for current expenditure via their local authorities (Dedicated Schools Grant), academies receive 
funds directly from the central government. Local authorities also receive Dedicated Schools 
Grant for students with high needs (“high needs block”). Each local authority is responsible for 
allocating budgets to their individual schools following a formula that must include a deprivation 
factor; these local formulas are also used by central government to determine the budgets for 
the academies situated in each local authority’s area. In addition, schools serving 
disadvantaged students will receive further resources through a targeted programmed (Pupil 
Premium) which they are free to spend according to their needs but for which they are also 
held accountable. No. 41 – Towards equity in school funding policies  | 7 
OECD EDUCATION POLICY PERSPECTIVES © OECD 2021 
      
• In New Zealand, schools (which are administered by boards of  trustees composed primarily 
of parents) are funded directly through the central government. While the payroll is covered by 
the Ministry of Education, each school receives operational funding based on a number of 
factors which include the socio- economic s tatus of the community and schools ’ location 
(adjustments for isolated schools). In addition, the ministry may provide targeted services and 
programmes. For example, the ministry funds a dedicated learning and behaviour service 
(Resource Teachers: Learning and Behaviour, RTLB), which is allocated across schools based 
on student enrolment and socio-economic background.  
• In Portugal, teacher resources and funding for current expenditures are mainly distributed 
across public schools by the Ministry of Education's Institute for Financial Management of 
Education ( Instituto de Gestão Financeira da Educação, IGeFE). For teacher resources, 
IGeFE allocates to schools the necessary financial resources after school clusters apply for 
their additional needs to the national administration. For the funding of school expenditure, 
IGeFE decides on the allocation following a request from the school cluster’s board and taking 
into account a common framework ( number of students, number of students with special 
needs, educational stages and programmes,  building structures, historical trends  and social 
context). Additional support is provided to schools through targeted programmes, such as the 
National Plan of School Achievement ( Plano Nacional de Sucesso Escolar , PNSE) and the 
Education Territories for Priority Intervention programme (Programa Territórios Educativos de 
Intervenção Prioritária, TEIP) . TEIP schools, representing about  16% of public education, 
develop their own strategies to address particular needs and submit proposals to central 
authorities that decide on the suitability for additional funding.  
During the COVID -19 pandemic, OECD countries and economies have relied on a range of targeted 
programmes to bridge equity gaps, through monetary or in- kind resource allocations. Across OECD 
countries and economies, introducing subsidies for devices ( personal computers, laptops) was the most 
common measure to target populations at risk of exclusion from distance education platforms  (OECD, 
2021[8]). Countries have also supported programmes to minimise declines in learning achievement due to 
remote learning periods. Finland, for instance, has funded programmes aimed at limiting learning losses 
for students with different needs (e.g. students  with an immigrant background,  students with special 
education needs)  (OECD, 2021 [8]).  In Portugal, all public schools can currently  apply for additional 
resources under the umbrella of the " Plano 21|23 -  Escola+", a special programme with more than 40 
measures meant to facilitate educational recovery . The programme enables recipient school clusters to 
hire additional resources (teachers and/or non-teaching staff). 
While targeted programmes allow for better steering and monitoring of the use of resources for equity 
purposes, they can also result in overlaps and inefficiencies and create a lack of predictability about future 
resource allocations. There are, therefore, arguments to reduce transaction costs by limiting the number 
of targeted programmes and including adjustments for equity within the main funding allocation.  
More efficiently supporting equity within a 
school system requires striking a balance 
between targeted and regular funding 
Also, additional resources for schools may not be sufficient to close gaps in achievement between 
advantaged and disadvantaged students. Notably, th e distribution of staff (which account for the largest 
part of expenditures and have a significant impact on student learning) needs to be considered.  While 
additional funding can be used to hire more staff, the distribution of staff is also influenced by other factors, 
such as recruitment processes and staff preferences and incentives (see (OECD, 2019[11]). 8 | No. 41 – Towards equity in school funding policies   
 OECD EDUCATION POLICY PERSPECTIVES © OECD 2021 
  
The role of funding formulas 
A well-designed funding formula can promote equity and efficiency . A funding formul a is a set of agreed 
criteria which are applied to each individual school, normally through a mathematical formula making the 
coefficients attached to each criterion explicit. Formula-based funding can help establish a clear framework 
for debates on the sufficiency and equity of resource allocations  and, in some systems, funding formulas 
have helped build general acceptance of resource allocations as fair among stakeholders.  Funding 
formulas are used in many countries to distribute regular funding for current expenditures  such as staff 
salaries. Austria, Chile, England (United Kingdom) and New Zealand in the examples above all use 
formulas to distribute resources through the main allocation and targeted funds. 
One major challenge in designing funding formulas is to adequately reflect that it does not cost the same 
to educate all students. There will be a need to fund schools differentially for legitimate differences in unit 
costs which are beyond the control of the school . This demands the introduction of different adjustment 
components in the formula and could lead to a high degree of complexity. A balance needs to be struck 
between a simple formula, which might fail to capture school needs with full accuracy, and a sophisticated 
formula, which might be difficult to understand.  
As a guide for designing formulas to better meet differing needs, research has identified four main 
components: i) a basic allocation; ii) an allocation for a specific educational provision; iii) an allocation for 
students with supplementary needs; and iv) an allocation for specific needs related to school site/location. 
Comprehensive and compelling analysis , and empirical evidence on the exact cost differences can  
strengthen the basis for policy decisions to review or adjust parameters included in funding mechanisms. 
Reliable evidence should be gathered on the adequacy of funding in general, and on specific elements 
that funding mechanisms aim to address, e.g.  equity problems related to socio- economic disadvantages, 
concerns for a more equitable distribution of funding in rural locations and the education of students with 
special educational needs. 
While there is no single best practice funding 
formula, a set of guiding principles can help 
design an effective approach 
Systems also need to pay adequate attention to the choice of indicators and the availability and quality of 
the related data when designing a funding allocation mechanism . A wide range of indicators are used 
across countries to distribut e funding to schools.  For instance, area-based funding aims to address the 
additional negative effects that socio- economic disadvantage has when it is concentrated in a particular 
area. However, such approaches risk leaving out a proportion of the disadvantaged population and include 
many individuals who are not disadvantaged. There is also evidence that the “target area” label can be 
stigmatising and encourage flight of middle class families from these areas. As a result, there has been a 
broad shift to using indicators that are more specific to the actual population in the school.  
In all cases , whether indicators target  specific areas, schools or students,  there is a trade- off between 
simplicity and transparency, on the one hand, and accuracy and fairness , on the other. Relatively simple 
indicators are likely to leave out some parts of the target population but also disregard certain sources of 
higher cost more broadly (e.g. school size) . For more precise targeting, more complex  indicators need to 
be established, although a higher degree of complexity makes these less transparent and understandable 
to administrators, schools and the  wider public. In many countries there is an ongoing debate as to how 
many indicators should be included, and there are examples where the use of simpler indicators did not 
make a large difference to schools’ funding levels. 
Many school funding systems aim to strike a balance between using census -based and school -based 
indicators. While the use of census-based data has been criticised in some systems for being out of date, No. 41 – Towards equity in school funding policies  | 9 
OECD EDUCATION POLICY PERSPECTIVES © OECD 2021 
      
such data cannot be manipulated by schools when there is incentive to inflate or deflate numbers in order 
to benefit from additional resources, thus giving greater integrity to the funding system.  A further problem 
is the misclassification and missing data on part of schools or students. Using census-based data as a 
proxy for individual student needs  can be less accurate in targeting individual students, but national 
research can help  choose the best proxy indicat or or combination of indicators. This also holds the 
advantage of reducing the reporting burden on schools.  
All systems should make sure to regularly 
review the indicators used to allocate 
resources to ensure that they reflect evolutions 
in data systems 
The following country examples illustrate some OECD countries’ approaches to funding formulas:  
• In the French Community of Belgium , for example, school leaders report every year the 
school population (of January) to the central level which attributes a soci o-economic index 
value to every pupil according to their residential area. The index of the residential area is 
based on individual characteristics such as income, qualification level and unemployment rate 
(and is reviewed every five years).  Schools are then ranked according to their average 
socio-economic index value, and 25% of schools with the lowest values qualify for additional 
teaching periods or funding allocations (at primary and secondary levels). 
• In the Netherlands , the central government provides schools for primary and secondary 
education with a lump- sum funding. The Netherlands relies on formula-based funding using 
objective criteria with a universally applied rule to determine the amount of resources each 
school is entitled to, for personnel and material financing. The main criteria for funding 
allocation are the number of students at October 1st of the preceding year, the type of school, 
the size of the school and, in primary education, the age of teachers. As part of the lump-sum, 
schools receive extra funding for students with a risk of educational disadvantage. Educational 
disadvantage is measured based on several variables , such as parental  educational 
attainment, origin of the mother or whether parents are in debt restructuring. Thus, the funding 
has a micro- as well as a macro-level component. 
 
 
   Box 1. How to provide resources for students with special educational needs? 
Needs-based allocation mechanisms to provide additional resources  for students with 
special educational needs (SEN) are intuitive and can be perceived as fair. In Chile, the 
education ministry provides funding to school providers for the inclusion of SEN students 
in school system via its School Integration Programme ( Programa de Integración Escolar, 
PIE). By law, schools can receive a grant for up to seven SEN students per class (five 
students with transitory disabilities and two with permanent disabilities). The resources of 
this programme are provided to be used in the purchase of specialised and/or adapted 
educational materials, hiring specialist staff, for training and coordination, and for 
collaborative work and planning. 
Needs-based allocation mechanisms may however have some undesirable effects.  When 
funding is dir ectly linked to the identification of individual students as having special 10 | No. 41 – Towards equity in school funding policies   
 OECD EDUCATION POLICY PERSPECTIVES © OECD 2021 
  
educational needs, this may lead to excessive labelling of students which is stigmatising 
for individuals and can lead to considerable cost inflation. To avoid inflation of the numbers 
of students identified over time and inconsistent categorisations, the criteria used for 
assessing students as having physical or learning impairments should be transparent, 
unambiguous and applied impartiall y by educational psychologists (also see (OECD, 
2018[12])). 
Several countries use individually targeted funding for students with more severe special 
educational needs , complemented by census -based funding for students with milder 
special educational needs or t hose linked to socio- economic disadvantage. Examples of 
such indicators are variables measuring social disadvantage (such as poverty, 
unemployment, poor housing, and low education level) in the immediate community of the 
school. Such indicators hold the advantage that schools cannot manipulate them. Another 
way of reducing the incentive for excessive labelling of  individual students is to allocate 
some of the funding for students with SEN to all schools, as a fixed percentage of their 
formula budget.  
Some systems may not use any funding earmarked for special needs students and this 
may risk the perception that funding is not allocated to support the learning of students with 
SEN. In such a context, stronger accountability at the school level with scrutiny b y school 
boards on the educational provision in the school for students with SEN and the impact it 
is having on their learning will play a key role. 
The OECD School Resources R eview of Denmark  (Nusche et al., 2016[13]), for example, 
found that municipalities rely to a decreasing extent on earmarked funding to individual 
students with SEN and more on general funding. In the more general approach, resources 
for students with SEN are allocated across schools with respect to general criteria 
measuring the socio-economic background of students. This approach aims to give schools 
the flexibility to optimally use these resources, taking factors such as the characteristics of 
peers into account when allocating resources. However, it has also raised some concerns 
over a lack of transparency on how resources follow students into regular schools and 
whether they receive adequate learning support. The OECD review therefore 
recommended greater transparency to the school community about how the school uses 
resources to facilitate inclusion and the way this translates into learning outcomes for SEN 
students. 
Political economy of reform and implementation costs 
There will always be winners and losers when changing an exi sting funding model unless additional 
resources are made available. Experiences in many countries thus highlight the importance of effectively 
managing the political economy of funding reform and of having a realistic estimate of its  implementation 
costs. Adequate stakeholder consultation is important to increase the perceived fairness of an allocation 
system and can help ensure that funding mechanisms respond to challenges that were not anticipated.  
In Austria, for example, the introduction of socio- economic criteria into the existing formula to distribute 
resources was a topic of much debate. While social partners supported the introduction of an index-based 
resource distribution , some provinces with a large share of rural schools were opposed to this chan ge 
since it would likely result in the redistribution of funding from rural to urban schools . As part of a major 
school reform in 2017, the education ministry was given the possibility to set socio- economic index into 
the resource allocation, but this required the introduction of regulations. In England and New Zealand, 
changes to the existing funding allocation model over the recent years have been controversial as well.  
Example for the costs of implementation come from Australia and the Flemish Community of Belgium . In 
Australia, the government explicitly made the promise that no school would lose funding when responding No. 41 – Towards equity in school funding policies  | 11 
OECD EDUCATION POLICY PERSPECTIVES © OECD 2021 
      
to a major review of the country’s funding model. The aim of the review was to better ensure adequate 
funding for students with greater educational needs. As such, the government needed to commit significant 
additional resources to implement the funding reform. In the Flemish Community,  changes to the system 
for distributing operating grants and staffing went in line with substantial increases in the overall budget.  
Promoting transparency and monitoring equity outcomes   
Many school systems  invest considerable resources to improve the educational opportunities and 
outcomes for student groups at risk of underperformance. But this financial commitment is not always 
matched with a strategy for monitoring the progress and outcomes of these groups. Monitoring equity can 
inform school funding decisions to the benefit of disadvantaged groups, help to target financial support 
more effectively, and increase the overall focus on equity in resource use decisions across the system.  
Countries should set c lear equity goals for the system and develop related indicators to monitor their 
achievement. This should entail the collection and analysis of data on the demographic characteristics of 
schools and students and the learning and other outcomes of disadvantaged students, for example through 
national assessments and labour force surveys.  Key data on learning outcomes should be sufficiently 
broken down for different student groups to facilitate analysis of the challenges they face. Disaggregated 
data can also help to facilitate peer learning among schools with a similar student intake and similar 
challenges. Commissioning thematic studies on the use of resources for equity is another option for 
monitoring the equity of the school system. Where multiple equity programmes are in place serving similar 
goals, it is important to approach evaluation from a whole-of-government perspective.   
In systems with considerable resource autonomy  for schools, school leaders also need to make equity 
judgements when allocating resources between different age groups, curriculum areas, courses, and 
students with different learning needs . In such contexts, it is also important to monitor how schools use 
their funding to provide high quality teaching and learning for all of their students. School boards can play 
an important role in discussing the use of funding for different student groups with the school leadership.  
Promoting budgetary transparency needs to be another key goal for school systems. Budgetary reporting 
linking evidence about the quality and equity of the school system in relation to established policy 
objectives and targets can provide clear information for decision- making and strengthen public 
participation, discussion and oversight. Differences in expenditure levels between regions/states/localities 
and schools can stem from a number of issues, such as different levels of efficiency or political decisions. 
Any inequities in available resources between schools and providers that may be linked to funding and 
governance arrangements should however be made transparent. In countries where public schools are 
allowed to raise their own financial resources in addition to public funding (e.g. by providing extracurricular 
activities or renting out facilities), for example, these resources should be accounted for in their budgets. 
Transparency is particularly important in complex governance systems where resources intended for 
disadvantaged groups are channelled through several tiers of administration. Local or school autonomy in 
spending decisions may mean that central equity funding strategies may be undermined at the local or 
school level if equity funding is shifted towards other student groups or allocated to purposes that have 
little effect on target groups. The distribution and use of funding and the actual expenditure outputs (the 
real cost of educating a student as opposed to the planned funding per student) within schools  should be 
transparent. 
   Box 2. Tracking school-level expenditure data in the United States 
Concerns about the equitable distribution of school funding within and across school 
districts in the United States have led to new federal data collections on school -level 
expenditures. 12 | No. 41 – Towards equity in school funding policies   
 OECD EDUCATION POLICY PERSPECTIVES © OECD 2021 
  
Many school districts in the United States do not have experience in systematically tracking 
expenditures at the school level, and the quality of these large- scale data collections is 
uncertain. To better understand the feasibility of broadening the collection and reporting of 
detailed school-level expendi ture data, and improving the quality of such data, a mixed 
method study by the United States Department of Education examined five states and four 
school districts that have developed their own accounting systems for school -level 
expenditures. While findings are not generalisable, they may be useful to inform efforts to 
implement school-level expenditure reporting systems, particularly in large urban areas that 
were the subject of this study.  
The states and districts that participated in the study had been collecting and reporting 
school-level expenditure data for varying amounts of time and reported similar motivations 
for developing or expanding their school expenditure data systems. Reasons include a 
response to the introduction of state laws intended to promote equity and transparency in 
school spending and district efforts to give schools more authority over spending decisions. 
To implement a system for collecting school -level expenditure data, authorities typically 
had to invest in new hardware and software, make changes to charts of accounts, and train 
their staff. They incurred both personnel and non-personnel expenses, which included staff 
time spent to choose and/or design the data system, to plan system roll out strategies and 
to develop training m aterials, as well as contracts with vendors or consultants and 
technology upgrades. Commonly identified challenges in developing a system to track 
school-level expenditure data included staff capacity and training.  
As the study demonstrates, collecting and reporting high quality school -level expenditure 
data is feasible and has perceived benefits for transparency, equity, and the efficient use 
of resources. A key challenge in the process of collecting and reporting school -level 
expenditure data lies in ens uring consistency in practices surrounding the attribution of 
funds to schools both within and across districts and states. 
Source: US Department of Education, Office of Planning, Evaluation and Policy Development, Policy and Program Studies Service 
(2017[14]), Exploring the Quality of School-Level Expenditure Data: Practices and Lessons Learned in Nine Sites, 
https://www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/opepd/ppss/reports.html (accessed on 14 October 2021). 
 
The bottom line: 
Efficiency alone is not the main concern of school systems but needs to be achieved alongside the 
quality and equity objectives that are at the heart of schooling. School funding policies should be 
designed so that available resources are directed to supporting high quality teaching and providing 
equitable learning opportunities for all students. School systems need to match resources with learner 
needs, striking a balance between targeted and regular funding. Funding formulas are particularly well 
suited to provide the resources required in vulnerable contexts and to foster debate about the 
distribution of resources. I nvestments in the educational opportunities for vulnerable students should 
be matched with a strategy for monitoring the progress and outcomes of these groups. No. 41 – Towards equity in school funding policies  | 13 
OECD EDUCATION POLICY PERSPECTIVES © OECD 2021 
      
School Resources 
This document was prepared by the School Resources team at the OECD. It 
is based on thematic reports  and country-specific work , with analytical 
contributions from: Luka Boeskens, David Liebowitz, Andreea Minea- Pic, 
Deborah Nusche, Thomas Radinger, Paulo Santiago and Claire Shewbridge.  
 
For more information 
Contact: Karine Tremblay, project leader, Karine.Tremblay@oecd.org   
See: OECD School Resources Review 
OECD (2017), The Funding of School Education: Connecting Resources and Learning, OECD 
Reviews of School Resources, OECD Publishing, Paris 
 
 
References 
 
Jackson, C. (2018), “Does School Spending Matter? The New Literature on an Old Question”, NBER 
Working Paper, No. 25368, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. 
[5] 
Jackson, C., R. Johnson and C. Persico (2016), “The Effects of School Spending on Educational and 
Economic Outcomes: Evidence from School Finance Reforms”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 
Vol. 131/1, pp. 157-218, http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjv036. 
[7] 
Johnson, R. and C. Jackson (2019), “Reducing Inequality through Dynamic Complementarity: Evidence 
from Head Start and Public School Spending”, American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, Vol. 11/4, 
pp. 310-349, http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/pol.20180510. 
[1] 
Lafortune, J., J. Rothstein and D. Schanzenbach (2018), “School Finance Reform and the Distribution of 
Student Achievement”, American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, Vol. 10/2, pp. 1-26, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1257/app.20160567. 
[6] 
Nusche, D. et al. (2016), OECD Reviews of School Resources: Denmark 2016, OECD Publishing, Paris. [13] 
OECD (2021), Education in Brazil: An International Perspective, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://www.oecd-
ilibrary.org/docserver/60a667f7-
en.pdf?expires=1632831848&id=id&accname=ocid84004878&checksum=EB874598443BCC860616D8
B0F724B8F0 (accessed on 28 September 2021). 
[9] 
OECD (2021), Education at a Glance 2021: OECD Indicators, OECD Publishing, Paris, 
https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/b35a14e5-en. 
[10] 
OECD (2021), OECD Economic Outlook, Interim Report September 2021: Keeping the Recovery on Track, 
OECD Publishing, Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/490d4832-en. 
[3] 
OECD (2021), The State of Global Education: 18 Months into the Pandemic, OECD Publishing, Paris, 
https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/docserver/1a23bb23-
[2] 14 | No. 41 – Towards equity in school funding policies   
 OECD EDUCATION POLICY PERSPECTIVES © OECD 2021 
  
en.pdf?expires=1632472645&id=id&accname=ocid84004878&checksum=4A783BF4B0A2B00DD71BC
5777C218D7D (accessed on 24 September 2021). 
OECD (2021), The State of School Education: One Year into the COVID Pandemic, OECD Publishing, 
Paris, https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/docserver/201dde84-
en.pdf?expires=1632997342&id=id&accname=guest&checksum=AB7A563077A4309BB5207DC1BF8D
8508 (accessed on 30 September 2021). 
[8] 
OECD (2020), PISA 2018 Results (Volume V): Effective Policies, Successful Schools, PISA, OECD 
Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/ca768d40-en (accessed on 1 February 2021). 
[4] 
OECD (2019), Working and Learning Together: Rethinking Human Resource Policies for Schools, OECD 
Reviews of School Resources, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/b7aaf050-en. 
[11] 
OECD (2018), Responsive School Systems: Connecting Facilities, Sectors and Programmes for Student 
Success, OECD Reviews of School Resources, OECD Publishing, Paris, 
https://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264306707-en. 
[12] 
US Department of Education, Office of Planning, Evaluation and Policy Development, Policy and Program 
Studies Service (2017), “Exploring the Quality of School-Level Expenditure Data: Practices and Lessons 
Learned in Nine Sites”, https://www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/opepd/ppss/reports.html. 
[14] 
 
 
 
 
This work is published under the responsibility of the Secretary -General of the OECD. The opinions expressed and 
arguments employed herein do not necessarily reflect the official views of OECD member countries. 
This document, as well as any data and any map included herein, are without prejudice to the status of or sovereignty 
over any territory, to the delimitation of international frontiers and boundaries and to the name of any territory, city or 
area. 
The statistical data for Israel are supplied by and are under the responsibility of the relevant Israeli authorities. The 
use of such data by the OECD is without prejudice to the status of the Golan Heights, East Jerusalem and Israeli 
settlements in the West Bank under the terms of international law. 
 
You can copy, download or print OECD content for your own use, and you can include excerpts from OECD 
publications, databases and multimedia products in your own documents, presentations, blogs, websites and teaching 
materials, provided that suitable acknowledgment of OECD as source and copyright owner is given. All requests for 
commercial use and translation rights should be submitted to rights@oecd.org.